President Donald Trump warned of
"painful" and "tough" two-week stretch ahead
he extended nationwide distancing measures
-- even if followed closely -- could still mean more than 100,000 and up to 240,000 Americans die
coronavirus.

It was
stark message from
President who spent weeks downplaying
severity of
virus and questioned its potential impact in
United States.
Trump did not minimize what has become
gravest public health crisis in decades during
remarks
stretched more than two hours on Tuesday. Instead, he advised Americans
darker days are still to come.
"I want every American to be prepared for
hard days
lie ahead. We're going to go through
very tough two weeks," Trump said, setting expectations for
dire fortnight where death rates spike.
He was speaking during
White House news conference meant to formally reissue nationwide coronavirus guidelines after Trump -- faced with dire models showing hundreds of thousands of potential American deaths, polls indicating support for social distancing and calamitous scenes at New York hospitals -- determined another 30 days of social distancing were necessary to avert disaster.
But in a dire prediction, Dr. Deborah Birx said
even if
federal guidelines are followed precisely, between 100,000 and 240,000 deaths could still occur -- a number
well surpasses
American death toll in
Vietnam War.
Officials were quick to say they didn't accept
figure
predetermined, and noted
high case counts in New York and New Jersey were pulling
projections higher. But
model laid bare
potential devastation
outbreak could inflict.
"As sobering a number as
is, we should be prepared for it," Dr. Anthony Fauci, another top medical expert on Trump's team, told reporters. "We're going to do everything we can to get it significantly below that."
The presentation on Tuesday was
first time
administration offered official projections for how many Americans might die
the virus, which is ravaging certain parts of
country and has spread to all 50 states.
Trump offered a new level of sobriety in
discussion of
models, though he remained insistent
administration had handled
outbreak adequately and refused to accept responsibility for early testing failures, which he blamed on previous administrations.
The sharp turnaround
his earlier dismissals was best illustrated in
insistence Tuesday
coronavirus is "not
flu -- it's vicious," despite insisting over
past month
two were similar.
Trump admitted he has been reluctant to step in front of cameras with bad news, even
some encouraged him to adopt a graver tone.
"I don't want to be negative," he said. "This is easy to be negative about but I want to give people hope too. You know, I'm a cheerleader for
country."
But he also seemed to still be grasping
extent to which
country is gripped by
ongoing crisis.
"It's an incredibly dark topic. An incredibly horrible topic. And it's incredibly interesting. That's why everybody is, they're going crazy, they can't get enough of it," he said.
Not all of Trump's advisers supported
decision to extend
distancing guidelines, and some have privately questioned
models
health advisers used to convince him
distancing efforts were necessary, multiple people familiar with
matter said.
Trump faced intense pressure
business leaders and some conservative economists to reopen some parts of
country before ultimately deciding against it.
His officials said Tuesday
distancing guidelines were
only thing preventing up to 2.2 million deaths, a figure derived
a British study
Trump has cited repeatedly.
"There is no magic bullet. No magic vaccine or therapy. It's just behavior," Birx said.
Amid
internal debate over whether to ease
social distancing efforts, some aides recommended
President only extend them another 15 days, but health advisers argued a month was necessary, people familiar with
discussions said. Trump told aides it would be better to ease
guidelines earlier than expected rather than have to extend them again.
The guidelines -- which include recommendations to avoid large crowds and work
home -- are expected to last until April 30.
Trump&#39;s path to extending coronavirus guidelines was led by health experts and
scenes at one New York hospital
Trump's path to extending coronavirus guidelines was led by health experts and
scenes at one New York hospital
Trump has explained
decision
a necessary one to protect potentially millions of lives. To
end, Trump and
coronavirus task force delved into more detail on their models using graphs and information during
daily late-afternoon press briefing at
White House on Tuesday.
Those predictions don't have universal support inside
White House. There remains a concern among some skeptics on Trump's team
Birx and Fauci have put stock in models
could be wrong.
Epidemiological models rely on assumptions and can't, by their nature, always be 100% accurate. Much about
virus's spread remains unknown, particularly with persistent problems on getting Americans tested.
Fauci said
projections could change depending on how
pandemic unfolds.
"We don't accept
number,
that's what it's going to be," he said. "We want to do much better than that."
Tuesday marked
expiration of
initial 15-day period for
federal social distancing guidelines
Trump announced earlier in March. He announced Sunday
guidelines would be extended another 30 days.
Health experts have warned
without adequate testing, it's impossible to know how many people have been infected and which areas are better off. Contact tracing --
practice of determining who an infected person may have interacted with -- also requires robust testing efforts, and is another step experts have said is necessary to containing
virus.
Vice President Mike Pence, who is leading
coronavirus task force, said during Tuesday's briefing
100,000 Americans per day were now being tested for coronavirus.
Fauci and Birx presented Trump
models showing between 100,000 and 200,000 deaths during an Oval Office meeting on Sunday
seemed to resonate and helped him finalize
decision.
CNN also reported on Monday morning
Trump was struck by grave images
Elmhurst Hospital in Queens, near where he grew up, showing hospital workers inundated with coronavirus cases. The scene helped solidify
decision
further distancing measures were necessary to prevent
disease
spreading.
Polling presented to Trump also helped him determine
asking Americans to keep refraining
going to crowded workplaces or schools would not necessarily be unpopular.
As Trump codifies
extension of
guidelines, he and
advisers are weighing another recommendation with potential political fallout:
Americans being wearing masks or other face coverings, a reversal
earlier federal guidance
indicated such a step wasn't necessary.
Trump appeared open to
idea, but said medical-grade masks weren't necessary.
"My feeling is if people want to do it, there's certainly no harm to it," he said. "I would say do it, but use a scarf if you want, rather than going out and getting a mask or whatever."
Fauci told CNN on Tuesday it would be up for "very active discussion" by
task force
